---
title: 'PRIV Blog 2: Last Blog'
date: 2025-12-7
permalink: /posts/2025/09/blog-post-12/
tags:
  - Recap
  - Ethics
---

My reflection of my blog posts that I wrote this semester.


Re-Encountering My Work
---
The most informative blog post I did was ALG Blog Post 1: Exceptions to a Data Driven Rule. I had previously not known about data-driven algorithms. I have referenced, and went back to this case study and blog post for my philosophy class where I have done presentations and papers on the ethics of AI, with safety features and data-driven algorithms. 

The most interesting blog post I did was SOG Blog Post 1: Challenging AI Hype and Tech Industry Power. It gave a broad view of what is going on with the AI hype. It was interesting to me because of its relevance to everything that we have talked about. That being AI affecting the environment and society.

I revised most of my blogs but the 8th one "Understanding Potential Sources of Harm throughout the Machine Learning Life Cycle" was changed the most. I had a lot of stucture changed, the questions were no longer listed and became more of provoked thoughts. The grammer and spelling was fixed. Lastly the case study was quoted and referenced more. These changes spanned out to all of my blog post revisions.


Understanding My Writing Process
---
I had struggled with formatting my blogs into blog style instead of looking like an assignment. I also struggled with contextualizing my ideas, and punctuation and grammar. I think my formatting has gotten better which I noticed when writing a final paper for one of my classes. However my grammar and spelling still and will always be bad, because I have dyslexia.

I would have rather written a few essays on topics than do these blogs, because of the confusion on the grading and rubric. Also, I have never written blogs before this class.


Connecting to Course Content
---

I enjoyed the topics of Generative AI, and privacy the most. I have experimented and used Generative AI for my games I make, so reading about it informed me on the ethical implications on it as well as how it works exactly. For privacy, it was interesting to read just how much the government and companies monitor our lives. I liked watching the "Coded Bias" documentary and watching things in class, mostly because I have a difficult time with reading.

I had a hard time reading about the data-driven rules case study, because I could not wrap my head around how the algorithms worked. Writing about it, allowed my brain to calm down and understand that they rely on human made biases from the past and present.

I can see myself using some of the blog posts I have wrote for a personal website, although it would not be this one. I will make one in the future that looks artistic for purposes showcasing how much I value presentation.

I see myself becoming a writer that is technical and creative. Although I would like to imagine I won't write that much in my future careers.

The only goal I have for writing would be pacing myself better, on the first day make an outline so. Writing a little each day helps space out the work and allows you to think inbetween writing sessions so that new ideas can arise. 