---
title: 'Info Blog 2: Policies for Creative Works'
date: 2025-11-16
permalink: /posts/2025/09/blog-post-10/
tags:
  - Case Study
  - Copyright
  - Generative AI
  - Ethics
---

My reaction to a case study arguing how copyright laws of Generative AI could be harmful.

**Case Study:**  
[ARTificial: Why Copyright Is Not the Right Policy Tool to Deal with Generative AI](https://yalelawjournal.org/forum/artificial-why-copyright-is-not-the-right-policy-tool-to-deal-with-generative-ai)

Summary
---
The case study discusses how copyright laws are not substantial enough to cover Generative AI, it should be done a different way. It can instead harm the internet as a whole. For example, Generative AI is too complex for laws like fair use, and it can be abused by large law firms who target normal people who are just quoting, or using AI to teach. The author mentions "big players" and how they take the moral high ground and side with the creatives who want restrictions on the AI. The copyright laws won't guarantee money to these indiviudal artists, because it is expensive, and time consuming. The author is not doubting that AI is threatening the livelihood of creatgive workers.  

AI models have different approaches in how they handle algorithims, the author points out how current AI lawsuits use these details in court. Multimodal AI intergrates different data. GAI tries to create new information. Because of these different ways these models are train and function, the legal bindings are different for each case.

The author mentions Margaret Boden for possible definitions for creativity; Combinations, Exploratory, and transformational. With this AI could be classified as creative. When looking at creativity from AI we should consider the perspective of the creator of the sysytem, the person making the prompt, and the perspective of the result. AI can also be looked at as creative if you view it not aware of it being generated by AI and then giving it artistic value, this is the Turning test for art. They can suprise us with their outcomes.

The creative market is already in a state that enables exploitation of artists. The author mentions is like giving a bullied school kid more lunch money at school, but then gets stolen by the bully. Constent to use creative work is often coerced. Training AI on public domains instead of everything may not meet the needs of our society today. Big Tech will fight to keep there investment of Gen AI.

Discussion Questions
---
The following are my answers to various questions asked at the end of the case study.

1.How should authors be compensated, and under which circumstances?

Best case scenario would be all artists work that was used in the training had permission granted and payment. It could work where the AI understands what artists it references when it generates the text, photo, or video and automatically sends money to the creator via an applied grant or something along those lines.

2.Is training with unlicensed works a fair use, or an infringing one?

I would argue it is not fair use. It is infringing simply because fair use is a very case by case basis thing, and AI using unlicensed work would produce so many "cases" that there would definitely be some unfair use. There are 4 different criteras for fair use. Theres Character of the use; how much of the unlicensed work is being used? Nature of the work; Is it creative, is it factual? Amount used; How much of the art is in the generated AI. Effect upon the market; Is the generated material transformative and not a copy?

3.Are the outputs generated by GAI original or derivative works?

I believe they are derivatives of work, because they are typically trained on other work, and they are acessed on how accurate they are to copying said work; yes this is a tree, no that is not a dog. They may produce things that have never been made before, but the data that was used to create that work was trained on someones work, thus it is derived of artists. Now you could argue: what if you train AI on AI generated work, that is original, never seen before? I would answer this with it being rooted in work, it would not have existed if the original AI was never trained in the first place. 

4.Should we distinguish between autonomous and assisted AI creations? Can AI be assigned rights as an author for its contributions in some capacity? If so, where should the line be drawn? Or should all AI creations be in the public domain? · Would assigning copyright to AI works create an imbalance in the public domain due to the massive scale and velocity at which AI can operate?

I think at large scales having AI help you is totally fine. I think it is lame when I see people on Twitter acclaim themselves as artists, and its all just AI, its like yeah thats not really skillful, with no time and effort. If you create an entirely AI generated medium with no modifcation I would say that this is all from peoples work and you have no barring in legal precidence over it. I don't see why we should flood and oversaturate the public domain with AI slop, it sounds like a terrible idea. However work with some AI used is fine, it just cannot be a lot like the whole video is AI, and you just color corrected it, or the song is AI and you added the bass track. 

Something to Consider
---

If Generative AI is scraped and retrained only using public domain, would you use it?

I ask these questions because of how useful it would be at that point. It would have significantly less power than it does now, and at that point I don't believe many people would use it. However, I think given enough time it may reach the power of today and possibility surpass its accuracy due to how slow the development would be, it would be easier to catch bugs, and biases.

Reflection
---

Going into this case study I was thinking to myself that copyright law should defenitly be enforced on these AI techonologies, but this case study just explained how that it already is exploited and does not benefit individual artists. I still think calling generative AI creative is dumb because it is not a human, it does not have the emotions and understandings capable of making genuine art. It just mimics what it thinks we would accept, and the issue is we have been accepting more and more of it because of how good it is getting. In the case study the author briefly mentions universal income, and that made me think of grants you could apply for if you are an artist, and if your art has been trained on. Tech companies should not be allowed to get off scott free without paying some reperations to artists.