---
title: 'PRIV Blog 1: Complete Delete'
date: 2025-12-2
permalink: /posts/2025/09/blog-post-10/
tags:
  - Case Study
  - Privacy
  - Laws
  - Ethics
---

My reaction to a case study discussing how our data is now more than ever hard to fully delete.

**Case Study:**  
[Complete Delete: In Practice, Clicking 'Delete' Rarely Deletes. Should it?](https://mit-serc.pubpub.org/pub/fesqymtr/release/3?readingCollection=ca73f7c0)

Summary
---
The case study explains various ways in which your digital files like images get copied and saved onto different systems. Older computers would replace old data with newer data due to limited storage, but today’s devices  keep multiple copies of data to improve performance. Newer storage systems like SSDs mark deleted files instead of overwriting them, allowing for easy recovery. There are cloud systems like Apple's Time Machine that copy files to the cloud and allow for easy access and recovery. The author brings up a point that data and information are usually never fully deleted, which brings up issues of privacy and security. The author offers 4 possible polices to deal with this:

Policy #0—Never delete. In principle, it is possible to design a computer that never deletes files. Such computers require more and more storage as they run, but not as much as you might think. Modern source code control systems such as ‘git’ never delete anything; they simply hide old information so that it is not visible—but that old data can always be recovered. Cloud-based storage systems like Dropbox, Google Drive, and Microsoft OneDrive can be configured to store every version of every document for months or even years.

Policy #1—Indeterminant deletion. As we have seen, on most systems, what happens to data after the user presses delete is undefined. The physical blocks that hold the data for deleted files are not overwritten. These data can be recovered using special file recovery tools until the blocks are allocated to another purpose and overwritten.

Policy #2—Local complete delete. Systems can implement Complete Delete for local files, either by explicitly overwriting blocks when they are freed or by using cryptographic erasure. However, copies of files on other computers or in backup systems will be left unscathed.

Policy #3—Global complete delete. Every file can be encrypted such that each file can only be accessed using a centrally managed encryption key. Deleting the key assures that the file is now inaccessible everywhere. This also dramatically increases system complexity and impacts system performance, ultimately increasing costs.

[Read More](https://mit-serc.pubpub.org/pubfesqymtr#balancing-the-needs-of-users-litigants-and-law-enforcement)


Discussion Questions
---
The following are my answers to various questions asked at the end of the case study.

1.Propose approaches for informing users of the existence of remnant data on their systems.

If you have ever used a Windows computer and enabled OneDrive you may notice that the folders and files on your home screen are marked with either an x or a checkmark on the corner of them. This is the OneDrive system that tells you whether or not they are synced with Microsoft's OneDrive, which is a cloud backup system. This system seems good enough to me, so I would change it so that folders and files, if copied would display a duplicate paper icon by it, and if it is not it would have no icon. Then I would allow the user to click on said file/folder and see the file path or place in which it has been copied in.

2.Compare the advantages of deleting information with information permanence.

Deleting information can eliminate privacy concerns with possible intimate, or incriminating photos and conversations. It allows users to have control over their data, and reduces security concerns. Allowing for information permanence can be beneficial if you are working on projects that often become corrupted or get deleted accidentally. Systems like Github preserve past versions for collaboration. It can be useful for harboring important legal documents that cannot afford to be lost.

3.Should law-abiding people and organizations be able to irrevocably erase data? If so, how would that impact the abilities of law enforcement? Discuss the elements that this policy choice shares with the debate over law enforcement access to encrypted data and how it is different.

Yes, the answer lies in law-abiding. If you have done no wrong, you should be able to delete information and data of you that can do you harm, whether thats through blackmail, theft or even sextortion. "the same study found that one in seven adults have been threatened by someone with whom they shared an image that the image would be further circulated, an act sometimes termed ‘sextortion" [Read More](https://mit-serc.pubpub.org/pub/fesqymtr#n3qr7m0jq70). However, I think that law enforcement should be able to check if and when you deleted something if you are a suspect to a case. Also there are a lot of cases where erasing data is not optimal, like for document based organizations like health care, and infrastructure that need records to have accountability, audit trails, prevent fraud, and comply with federal regulations.

4.Some US policymakers believe that it should be possible for the US government to be able to access the encrypted contents of phones and other devices, but at the same time, they want US devices protected against foreign governments such as the governments of Russia, China, and Iran. US companies have responded that any capabilities that would be made available to the US government would have to be made available to other governments as well, resulting in systems that are less secure for everyone. Argue one position or the other.

I do not think this is a good idea, in fact I believe this is a terrible idea. Backdoors to our phones and computers created by the U.S could and have been accessed by foreign governments and bad actors. This does not get rid of the issue, it keeps surveillance on the U.S population, thus lessening trust of our government. "According to reports, the hack took advantage of systems built by ISPs like Verizon, AT&T, and Lumen Technologies (formerly CenturyLink) to give law enforcement and intelligence agencies access to the ISPs’ user data. This gave China unprecedented access to data related to U.S. government requests to these major telecommunications companies." [Read More](https://www.eff.org/deeplinks/2024/10/salt-typhoon-hack-shows-theres-no-security-backdoor-thats-only-good-guys)


Something to Consider
---

How does information permanence influence what you say, post, and take pictures of?

I ask this questions because at what point do you think; no I should not say that because I could get in trouble. Some people post and say insane things and simply do not care, while others like myself are very cautious of what we do online. These things can have consequences like getting blacklisted from jobs, universities, and social circles. It is important to consider what you say or do, especially in online contexts.

Reflection
---
I had a conversation with my dad about how everything is recorded now. Back in his days of being a young man he did not have to worry about having a picture or video of him taken when he was out partying. This new age of permanent information has made bad behavior even worse because now it can be viewed over and over again. Should there be forgiveness? Well yes in some cases, others no. It can expose peoples true selves while also showing good people at their worst moments, it is unfair to be seen in that light on first glance if you are good.
