---
title: 'Blog Post 1: What Exactly Are A.I Companies Trying to Build?'
date: 2025-09-16
permalink: /posts/2025/09/blog-post-1/
tags:
  - News Article
  - A.I
  - ethics
---

A summary of what big A.I companies are trying to achieve.

**Case Study reading:**  
[What Exactly Are A.I Companies Trying to Build?](https://www.nytimes.com/2025/09/16/technology/what-exactly-are-ai-companies-trying-to-build-heres-a-guide.html)

Discussion Questions
---
I chose this article because I was curious of the goals and missons of these extremely rich and influential tech CEO's. These CEO's are in my opnion bad actors for the social damage and lack of regulation of data selling, and there products are designed to be addictive, they tend to insentvice profit gain. I also wanted to learn more about the tools, AI interests me a lot despite its many ethical problems.

The ethical concerns are it will be a waste of money and resources. The job market will be effected with cuts to jobs that have replacable aspects like office jobs. Data from these products that use A.I will most definitely be sold. There have been many cases of people going insnae and even commiting sucide from generating relationships with chat bots.

The Stake holders of this article are tech companies and CEO's; Prioritize profit without consideration of ethical concerns. White collar workers; People who have A.I replicated jobs will be replaced in big tech companies. The Government; They have the responsibility to regulate unethical tech products.

Some ethical frame works of this are Virtue; Right action would be fact checking on social media and the wrong thing would be spreading misinformation. Utilitarianism; Right action would be having A.I cure diseases and improve science. Wrong action would be ruining the environment and not working around it. Not putting regulation on it. Using it for warfare.

This exercise was enjoyable and it allowed me to collect and explain more critial thoughts about it, then I would just reading it.